1)oops Depends on users
2)class is lueprint which consists of attributes and methods
3)object is instace of class 

4)encapsulation:wrapping data and providing security
               it has 3 attributes 1.private :inside the class only 2.public: inside,outside anywhere  3.protected:inside class inside child class

5)Inheritance : acquiring properties of parent class to child classs
6)polymorphism:one thing many forms
7)Abstraction:


1. OOPs – Object-Oriented Programming

Definition:
OOP is a programming approach where we organize a program using classes and objects.

Scenario – Banking Application:
Suppose we are creating a banking application. Instead of writing all the code together, we can create classes such as Customer, Account, and Transaction. Each object represents a real customer or account.

Why we use it:
It makes large programs organized, reusable, maintainable, and easier to modify.

2. Class

Definition:
A class is a blueprint or template that contains attributes and methods.

Scenario – LinkedIn:
LinkedIn can have a Profile class.

Attributes → name, email, skills, experience
Methods → update_profile(), add_skill(), connect()

Each LinkedIn user's profile can be created as an object of the Profile class.

Why we use it:
We can define the structure once and create multiple objects from

3. Object

Definition:
An object is an instance of a class that represents a specific entity.

Scenario – LinkedIn:
If Profile is a class, your LinkedIn profile can be an object of that class.

For example:

profile1 = Profile("Reena", "Python", "AI/ML")

Here, profile1 is an object.

Why we use it:
Objects allow us to work with the actual data and behavior defined by a class.


4. Encapsulation – Instagram Example

Definition:
Encapsulation is the process of wrapping data and methods into a single unit and controlling access to the data.

Scenario – Instagram:
Consider your Instagram account. Your private information such as password, email, and account settings should not be directly accessible or modified by anyone.

For example:

You can change your password through Instagram's settings.
You can change your profile through the Edit Profile option.
You cannot directly access or modify Instagram's internal account data.

Instagram provides specific methods/features to control how your data is accessed and modified.

Why we use it:
Encapsulation is used to protect data, prevent unauthorized access, and control how data is modified.

Why we use it:
To protect data and control how the data is accessed or modified.

Access levels in Python:

Public → accessible from anywhere
Protected (_) → intended for the class and child classes
Private (__) → intended to be accessed within the class

5. Inheritance

Definition:
Inheritance is the process where a child class acquires the attributes and methods of a parent class.

Scenario – LinkedIn:
Suppose LinkedIn has a general User class containing:

name
email
profile()
connect()

Now we create:

PremiumUser(User)

The PremiumUser automatically gets the common features of User and can also have additional features such as:

InMail
Premium badge
Advanced search

Why we use it:
To reuse existing code and avoid writing the same code again.

6. Polymorphism – YouTube Example

Definition:
Polymorphism means one thing can have many forms. In programming, the same method or operation can behave differently depending on the object.

Scenario – YouTube:
Consider the Play Video feature on YouTube.

Without subscription (YouTube Free): When you play a video, you may see advertisements before or during the video.
With subscription (YouTube Premium): When you play the same video, it plays without advertisements.

The action is the same — playing a video, but the behavior is different depending on whether the user has a subscription or not.

Why we use it:
Polymorphism allows us to use the same operation with different behaviors, making the program more flexible and easier to maintain.

Easy interview line:

"YouTube is an example of polymorphism because the same play-video operation behaves differently for free users and premium users."

7. Abstraction

Definition:
Abstraction means hiding complex implementation details and showing only the necessary features to the user.

Scenario – PhonePe:
When you send money through PhonePe, you simply:

Select receiver → Enter amount → Click Pay

You don't need to know:

How UPI verifies the transaction
How the bank communicates with the UPI system
How the transaction is processed internally

PhonePe hides all those complex details and gives you a simple payment interface.

Why we use it:
To reduce complexity and make the system easier for users to interact with


8)attributes are two types
1. Instance Attributes

Definition:
Instance attributes are attributes whose values are different for each object.
these are called outside the class

Scenario – Instagram:
Each Instagram user has different username, followers, and bio.

user1.username = "Reena"
user2.username = "kowsar"

Here, username is an instance attribute because each user has a different value.

2. Class Attributes

Definition:
Class attributes are attributes whose values are common to all objects.

Scenario – Instagram:
All Instagram users belong to the same platform.

class Instagram:
    platform = "Instagram"

Here, platform is a class attribute because it is common to all users.

Easy Difference
Instance attribute → Different for each object → username
Class attribute → Common to all objects → platform

9)methods:class methods,static ,instace:
Definition:
A method is a function defined inside a class that performs a specific action.

There are 3 types of methods in Python:

1. Instance Method

Definition:
An instance method works with object-specific data and takes self as the first parameter.

Scenario – Instagram:
A user can update their own profile.

def update_profile(self):
    print("Profile updated")

Here, self refers to the particular Instagram user.

2. Class Method

Definition:
A class method works with class-level data and takes cls as the first parameter.

Scenario – Instagram:
Suppose Instagram wants to change a common platform setting for all users.

@classmethod
def change_platform(cls):
    cls.platform = "Instagram"

Here, cls refers to the class.

3. Static Method

Definition:
A static method does not depend on instance or class data. It is used for a general utility related to the class.

Scenario – Instagram:
Checking whether a username is valid:

@staticmethod
def check_username(name):
    return len(name) >= 3

It doesn't need self or cls.

Easy Difference
Instance method → Works with object data → self 
Class method → Works with class data → cls    (we @classmethod decorator)
Static method → Independent/general utility → no self or cls  (we use @staticmethod)

with classname we can't access instance method
  

constructor

encapsulation

inherotance->5 types
    1.single(a->b) 2.multiple (a,b->a) 3.multilevel(a->b->c) 4.herirachial (a->a,b)  5.hybrid(combination on any two inheritances)
super method is used to aceess parent class to child class when both are same names

polymorphism:one thing many forms
1.method overloading:same method different parameters
2.method overriding:same method same parameters but differenet class (Parenta class and child class)
3.operator overloading:

python doesnt support method overloading